---
layout: post
title: "FOSDEM 2024 notes"
date: 2024-02-04 22:29:58 +0100
comments: true
categories: [Django, Accessibility, Community]
---

It was my first time at FOSDEM. I met up with friends, volunteered at the conference, organized an informal accessibility discussion. Great time.

<!-- more -->

## Volunteering

I decided to spend my first day of FOSDEM as a volunteer. It’s a great way to meet new people, do something new, and obviously give back to the conference (which is completely free).

Of all [possible tasks](https://volunteers.fosdem.org/tasks/), I signed up for the Volunteer pool and did a bit of everything:

- Put up privacy covers on the windows in the first aid space
- Took out the trash (lots of cardboard boxes)
- Helped at the volunteers info desk
- Did heralding for [Take Your FOSS Project From Surviving To Thriving](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2741-take-your-foss-project-from-surviving-to-thriving/) (great talk)
- And also heralding for [The Regulators Are Coming: One Year On](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-3683-the-regulators-are-coming-one-year-on/) (also a great session)

## Thunderbird - Ryan Sipes

[Take Your FOSS Project From Surviving To Thriving](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2741-take-your-foss-project-from-surviving-to-thriving/) was so good that I took notes :)

- “We don’t need more unmaintained software that people rely on”
- Thunderbird perception: “Crappy Outlook”
- To avoid – Associating OSS with “not as good”
- It works: Asking for money in a direct way to users
- When: After upgrades
- Don’t maintain your own donation stack

## Design clinic

I attended a design clinic session run by [Open Source Design](https://opensourcedesign.net/), where we discussed challenges for Django.
Bernard and Belem provided us with a lot of suggestions and insights.

- Make a Call to action for designers
- Record testimonials of admin users
- Provide empirical proof of design issues
- Open source design consulting
- Planning, open source design easy
- Do a call / make a plan
- Teach desigenrs about open source
- font size customization in site or app
- Give and respect choices

## Product management methods

Lauri Apple’s [Please Make It Make Sense: Product Management Methods to Make Your Project's Purpose Clear](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-1693-please-make-it-make-sense-product-management-methods-to-make-your-project-s-purpose-clear/) was great. Lauri has been helping with Wagtail’s [sustainability roadmap](https://github.com/wagtail/rfcs/pull/90), and I learned a lot from her feedback and coaching.

- Different groups help diversity
- Sustainability for project managers
- Valuable high-purpose work
- Product management great way to get experience
- “Do a survey”
- “We want scooters now”
- “Not no but not yet”
- Quality of life

## Accessibility and ATAG BoF

Notes for [Web Accessibility and ATAG](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-3757-web-accessibility-and-atag/).

Main conclusion: we’re organising an Accessibility devroom next year :)

### WCAG

"Standard", but accessibility is first and foremost about doing what works for users. A, AA, AAA. "For a standard about accessibility, it’s not the most accessible document"

### WCAG 2.2

- Controversial? accessible authentication – captcha
- Security <--> accessibility tension
- Effectiveness of captcha vs. bots, risk to block real users
- "makes people think"
- Backend expertise fundamental for authentication

### WCAG 3.0

❓ Relevance of WCAG for designers. WAI EOWG. "WCAG for designers" website

Future website: WCAG for backend devs?

shouldIUseCarousels.com website

### ATAG

- "Have you looked into ATAG?"
- CMS users
- Tools accessibility create barriers
- People with disabilities left out of software engineering careers

### Accessibility in grants programs

- Red team accessibility audit
- Accessibility testing at the end
- Accessibility Blueprints

## Power profiling

[Power profiling my entire house with the Firefox Profiler](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2723-power-profiling-my-entire-house-with-the-firefox-profiler/) was an excellent overview of how readily available the tooling is to measure energy use.
I had heard of the Firefox Profiler’s new features before but never had the chance to use it, so this talk was very insightful.

## CMS dev room

I joined the CMS dev room ("[Designing Futures of FOSS Content Management with the Open Website Alliance](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/track/open-website-alliance/)") towards the end of the conference.

I find the concept of the [Open Website Alliance](https://openwebsitealliance.org/) interesting, though I’d rather see collaboration on more specific topics like accessibility.
